---
layout: talk
active: bob2019
title: Checking Musical Correctness
speaker: Chris Ford 
portrait: chris-ford.jpg
time: 10:15-11:00
type: Vortrag
language: english
head: 2019
---

Music theorists have a questionable history of taking tendencies
observed in European musics and deploying them as prescriptive
rulesets. Fortunately, musicians break these rules whenever it suits
them. In fact, cognitive science suggests that rulebreaking and
manipulating audience expectations is fundamental to how music is able
to provoke emotion. But in the universe of algorithmic music, we can,
if we choose, use software correctness techniques like schemas and
types to enforce musical rules. This gives rise to a dilemma. If we
make illegal states unrepresentable, do we make innovative states
unimaginable? This talk will attempt to resolve the dilemma using a
practical reconciliation between Paul Hudak’s Haskell school of
expression and David Huron’s psychological theory of expectations.

### Chris Ford

Chris began to make music with code to compensate for his poor piano
technique. It was only later that he realised that programming offers
deep insight into musical structures. Over the past few years, Chris
has given many talks presenting music theory to programming audiences,
covering topics including European classical music, complexity theory,
jazz, central African polyrhythms and tuning systems. His work with
ThoughtWorks has taken him to many places around the world. Currently,
he lives and works in Barcelona.
